Good afternoon, everybody.
I'd like to begin with a
couple of announcements.
One, anybody who is interested in being
considered for the beta program,
we would encourage them to sign
up at applec.apple.com/webobjects.
And I believe we have the
URL posted in our lab in Room L,
and you can probably
sign up online there.
And also,
one of the things that we're doing
is we're collecting business cards
of developers of websites that
would like to be included as kind of
reference sites or reference customers.
And so after the session,
I'll be on over there if anybody's
interested in that as well.
So with that...
I would like to introduce
Melissa Turner for our WebObjects
and Web Services session.
Thanks, Bob.
Hi again to those of you
who were here last year.
I'm still Melissa.
I'm still in WebObjects engineering,
and I'm still a female engineer.
It still happens.
I'm here today to talk about
web services and WebObjects.
A lot of you probably know that there's
been a lot of hype in the industry over
the last year or so about web services,
and we thought we should do something
about that in WebObjects and help
you go in a direction that a lot
of people seem to be wanting to go.
This session is going to introduce
basic web services technologies,
and I'm going to talk about
using WebObjects to vend
and consume web services.
What we expect you to learn from this is
a little bit about some of the buzzwords
that are out there in the industry now.
SOAP, WSDL, UDDI, Apache Access.
We expect you to have a basic
grasp of how to vend a web
service using WebObjects,
both using the traditional model
where you get to write all the code,
and using direct-to-web services,
which some of you may have heard about
during the tools overview on Monday,
and how to consume a web
service using WebObjects.
I'm not going to talk about any
WebObjects technologies in depth.
If we shipped it last year
and you don't know about it,
this is the wrong place for you to be.
And I'm not going to talk about .NET,
which is Microsoft's entry
in the Web Services Fair.
What are web services?
Well, I could give you a great big
long dissertation on what web
services might or might not be,
but I think a picture's
worth a thousand words.
Web services aren't really defined.
Everybody's got their own entry.
For discovery, you've got Disco, WSDL,
WS Inspection, UDDI.
You've got Crimson, Xerxes,
the Jax-P parsers.
Everybody has come up
with their own standards,
their own specifications,
and the industry's currently
trying to hammer out which
pieces are going to be used.
Parts that people seem to have
come to a consensus on are that web
services are web pages for computers.
They're basically intended for
application-to-application communication.
There's not intended to be
any human being in the link,
except possibly you as developers
who are going to have to,
well, debug this stuff.
The information transmitted is commonly
agreed that should be XML encoded.
This usually means using SOAP over
HTTP as a communications protocol.
We'll talk a little bit about SOAP later.
Web services are described using WSDL.
We'll talk about that later as well.
And we'll talk about how they
can be located using UDDI.
Why are web services?
This is a really big question
since it seems to be so big
and so hyped in the industry.
Web services, well,
they're intended to be an integration
technology to allow people to move
data between all of the very strict
vertical silos that are out there.
You may have a database that you've built
for your customer end using WebObjects
that serves web pages and serves as
your online portal for customers to
come and purchase stuff from you.
You may have a separate customer
relationship management system
that's independent of that.
You've probably got a purchasing
and fulfillment system.
You may want to automate your business
processes and get all of these things
talking to each other so you don't have
either people or demons moving data
from database to database to database,
which is what tends to happen nowadays.
How can you do this?
There's a few types of web services.
There's RPC-based web services,
which essentially involve
making a remote procedure call.
You're all familiar with this.
Using either SOAP RPC or XML RPC seem
to be the big contenders.
There's also
SOAP document-style services,
where you simply pass a wad of XML,
and it's up to the receiver on the
other end to figure out what to
do with that large wad document.
You can have synchronous
or asynchronous services.
The most common ones are:
currently synchronous with
a request-response loop,
that may be followed from the
fact that it's done using HTTP,
where you naturally expect to
have a request-response loop.
What people are starting to talk
about as well are asynchronous web
services where you may register
using one particular call and get,
at some later point,
one or more notifications
from a web service.
A good example of this would be a
list-serve type of thing where you make
one web service call to register for
a mailing list and you subsequently get
lots and lots of messages from that list.
Technology-wise,
I've already mentioned SOAP.
SOAP is a lightweight XML protocol
for transmitting data in
a distributed environment.
What does this mean?
Well, it means it defines the contents of
the package you're passing around,
but isn't bound to a wire protocol.
You can pass SOAP messages over HTTP.
You can pass them using SMTP.
And if you want, you can go all the way
down and do SOAP over TCP.
A few people have done it.
So SOAP defines what the
messages should look like,
but doesn't define how
you transmit them around.
An example of this would be,
here's a SOAP message.
You can see that it's got an
envelope that basically delimits
the data that's being passed
around as part of this message,
and specifies the encoding that's
used to read data out of the message.
It has a SOAP body that says, okay,
here's the payload.
And it has a payload.
This specific example that we see
up here is for an RPC request.
So,
The root element of the SOAP body
is the name of the SOAP request
that you're trying to pass.
And it's children.
are the parameters to the
request you're making.
In this case,
we have a--this is the canonical
stock price request example.
So we're passing across the stock
symbol and the company name.
Here's the response for that request.
Again, you see a SOAP envelope
containing the same information
that was there in the request.
A body.
In this case,
we've got a response element, again,
containing the payload,
which is all of the information
that's being returned by that request.
In this case,
it's a data structure containing
the last trade price and the
day's volume of the stock,
the stock trading.
That's pretty simple.
That's SOAP.
That's one of the main
web services technologies.
Next would be WSDL.
WSDL is the
Web Services Definition Language.
It's used to define
interfaces for web services.
It sets out such things as the location,
the data types in use,
and the messages that can be passed.
If we could go to demo machine one,
I'll actually show you a WSDL.
This is the WSDL for the
Google search service that a lot
of people have been talking about.
Google announced it a
couple of weeks ago.
You can see that basically it's an
XML document with a whole bunch of nodes.
You start reading WSDLs usually from the
bottom up where a service is defined.
In this case, the service's name is the
Google Search Service,
and it defines-- whoopsie--
A port name, which is dealt with
higher up in the WSDL,
and a binding, which is also described
higher in the WSDL.
And here we can see the location
to which you send SOAP requests if
you want to access this service.
The bindings deal with the
communication protocols in use
for invoking a web service.
In this case,
it's the Google Search binding.
We see that it's an RPC.
There are some times I find
Explorer extremely useful,
and sometimes I find it extremely,
extremely frustrating.
We can see that it's
an RPC-style service,
and that, again, its transport mechanism
is SOAP over HTTP.
We can see the names of the
operations that this service supports.
I'm going to digress a little bit here
briefly to talk about the difference
between a service and an operation.
You might want to think of a service,
a web service, as a class,
and operations are methods on
that class that can be invoked.
So, down at the bottom of the WSDL file,
we talked about the service itself.
And in the binding and port
type segments of the WSDL,
we talk about the operations.
In this section,
we see that there's SOAP operations,
we see their names,
and we see a little bit of
information that we don't really
need to know about because we
already know that it's SOAP HTTP.
If we go and look up at the port types,
it will define the input message and the
output messages for a given operation.
The messages are also
defined in the WSDL file.
Here we'll look at the
Do Google Search message.
Do Google Search is an RPC call
that takes a number of parameters.
We can see here, it takes a key,
something called Q, start, max results,
filter, restrict, and a few other things.
We also see that the types of
these parameters are defined.
So a developer who's looking at
this WSDL knows that they can make
a SOAP RPC call with all of these
parameters to the address that was
specified down at the bottom of the file,
and they will get--
A response.
We see here that the response is, well,
it's a return value, and the type
Google search result.
Well, that doesn't sound like
a type I'm familiar with.
So if I go look up further in the file,
well, here's a Google search result type.
It tells us all we could
possibly know about that type.
Google search result is essentially
a structured data type containing
all of the following elements.
It contains whether document
filtering is on or off,
some comments about the search,
The estimated total results and
all the things you're familiar
with seeing on the Google web page
when you actually do a search.
So that's a WSDL file.
It's actually fairly simple,
fairly straightforward,
describes everything you need
to know about a given web
service and its operations.
And now I need to go back to the slides.
So that was WSDL.
Oops, that was the faux demo.
Sorry about that, guys.
Technology-wise,
there's one more technology that's
very popular and very discussed
in the web services world,
and that's UDDI,
or the Uniform Discovery and
Description Integration.
Basically what UDDI is is a spec that
describes how to build a registry
for information about web services.
It can be a public registry.
Microsoft and IBM both run registries
where various businesses can go and
enter information about the business,
about the web services it's offering,
all kinds of stuff.
Or a company can run a private
registry that contains information
only about the business partners
they actually deal with.
UDDI has three types of
data in its registry,
what they call...
White pages, yellow pages,
and green pages.
White pages is essentially the
information about the business,
the business name, its contact points,
the services it offers.
Yellow pages is taxonomy information
that is only relevant to somebody
trying to locate a service.
And green pages,
which contain all of the information
about how to invoke a given service.
The green pages are originally intended
to be what the UDDI spec calls a T-model,
but what seems to be happening
is that a lot of the T-models
contain only one element,
and that's a link to the WSDL that
describes the web services.
And just as a point of note,
Unity AI Server can be built as a
direct-to-web services application.
We're hoping to provide you
with an example of this when we
actually ship our next release.
But we're just hoping at this point.
So those of you who have been sleeping
through that part can wake up now
because we're going to start talking
about web services in WebObjects.
Whys and Hows.
Why do we have web
services in WebObjects?
Well,
the most obvious answer is that we're
one of the silos that people may be
wanting to move data in and out of.
We've got a very proprietary data model,
proprietary interfaces.
It's hard to talk to us.
We're also one of the silos
people want to move data out of.
You build a web app for
your customer purchasing,
you have to move it into your
purchasing system somehow.
We're hoping to allow users to
leverage existing WoW investments.
I mean, you guys, a lot of you,
have spent lots of time
building EO models,
lots of time building business logic.
We don't want to force you to
rewrite that in another environment.
We want you to be able to
leverage what you've already got.
For people building new applications,
we want you to be able to leverage EOF.
I mean, we think EOF's a cool technology.
A lot of you guys seem to
think EOF's a cool technology.
We'd like to let you use it in
the web services space as well.
And we're hoping to let you leverage
the web services session model.
Sessions are something that
haven't been really well dealt
with in web services to date.
We think we have a pretty good solution,
and we'd like to let you use it.
So what do we do in WebObjects
to support web services?
Well, we're providing support for web
services being used as either a
client or a vendor of web services.
We're providing direct web services,
which Ron will talk about later.
And we've built our
product around Access,
which a couple of weeks after
I started research into web services,
one of my coworkers asked me,
why do you keep talking about EO Access?
It's like, I'm not.
Works better in the
verbal than visual realm.
But for the rest of this presentation,
whenever you hear Access,
think Apache Access, not EO Access.
Access is an open-source SOAP stack being
produced by the folks over at Apache.
It's their next
generation of Apache SOAP.
It's completely rewritten.
It's a lot more modular.
They've broken the dependencies
that the Apache SOAP had on
running inside a servlet container.
All kinds of good stuff
that we thought made sense.
But we've made it very fitting
to put inside WebObjects since,
well, the world really doesn't
need another SOAP stack.
There's a lot of them out there.
And it, like I said,
is at the heart of our
implementation of web services.
So how does our implementation work?
Well, a request comes in.
If you're running in standalone mode,
it'll come in through a web server.
If you're running in
servlet deployment mode,
it'll come in through a J2EE server.
And it's handed off to the
WebObjects application server.
Request comes into the runtime and is
sent to the WoWebServiceRequestHandler.
This is similar,
but not quite like all of the
other request handlers you've seen,
because instead of calling into
specified WebObjects classes,
it calls into Access.
Access does a couple of things.
First, it checks to see if there's
a session associated with the
SOAP request that's incoming.
And if so,
it goes to the WoSessionManager and
pulls the session out and associates
it with the incoming request.
And then it figures out how
to call your web service code.
How does it do that?
Well, Axis takes the request.
The Axis engine basically goes off
and looks at its web service registry,
which can be specified in
a WSDD file or dynamically,
to figure out which
service is being invoked.
It does this first by looking
for the HTTP SOAP action header.
If it doesn't find a SOAP action header,
it goes off and looks at the URL.
If it can't find the information
it's looking for in the URL,
it will go actually parse and
examine the body of the SOAP request
to find the namespace in the
application and match it up that way.
That will give it the service.
We talked earlier about SOAP RPC and
how the root element of the
SOAP body is the name of the
RPC method it's trying to invoke.
So it takes that and figures
out which provider it should
use to invoke that service.
The provider is something that
basically knows how to take a
SOAP service and a SOAP operation and
convert that into a Java web service.
a language method call.
Figures out what it's supposed
to be calling and it calls it.
This is the source
code you have to write.
And what you write can call
anywhere you want to go.
It can call off into EOF,
it can call off into somewhere
in the WebObjects stack.
It can call back out of WebObjects
if you're using your WebObjects
application as a web service aggregator.
But once your processing has happened,
you need to return something.
Because this is WebObjects,
we figure one of the major
things you're likely to want
to return is a WoE component.
You can do this.
The component gets returned to
the provider that did the calling,
and Axis tries to build a SOAP response.
It does this by going off and
looking at the type registry.
The type registry basically contains
mappings of classes to serializers.
If it finds a mapping for the
class of object you've returned,
turns.
Type registry returns the serializer.
In this case,
it would be a WoE component serializer.
Access then takes that serializer and
asks it to serialize the component
you've returned and stuffs the
result of that serialization into
the SOAP response and passes it back
to the web service request handler.
Likewise,
you can return any random object.
We've just special-cased for
components because they're useful.
You can return any object.
Again,
the object is returned to the provider
that did the method invocation.
The provider asks the type
registry for serializer.
At this point,
any serializer is returned.
We have serializers for a
number of the WebObjects classes
you're likely to care about.
We have serializers for NSMutableArray,
NSDictionary,
a bunch of stuff in WebObjects,
or in WODGE.
And we provide--this is the
important one for most of you--a
serializer for EO Enterprise objects.
Why do we have a serializer for each
class rather than just one glorious
serializer to end all serializers?
What it comes down to is,
it's a lot easier to control the
information that you're passing
in and out of your application.
We could build the serializer
to end all serializers,
but the problem is you get everything,
including stuff you may not actually
want to expose to your customers.
And we figured it's relatively
easy to write a serializer.
We can provide packages that'll
cover the basic classes you're
probably going to be returning.
And we don't want to force you or
inflict trying to figure out how
to change the XML produced by the
serializer to end all serializers.
So instead,
we let you register individual
serializers on a class-by-class basis
and a service-by-service basis that let
you do exactly what you want them to do.
And again,
The serialized XML is taken,
stuck into a WoW response,
and sent back out into
the big wide world.
Back in Axis a little bit,
before it sends the response back out,
it basically checks to see if
there's a session associated with
the processing it's been doing.
If there is,
it stuffs a SOAP header with the
WoW session ID into the SOAP response.
And, well, this is the inverse of what
it did on the other end.
The response to the
Web Service Request Handler.
At this point,
there's a last chance if you want
to do some kind of transformation on
the data that's going to be returned.
We have a hookup that allows you
to register an XSLT spreadsheet,
or XSLT transformation
with a given web service.
And at this point,
if you have registered an XSLT transform,
we'll run it.
Then we stuff the results in a woe
response and return the woe response.
So at this point, you might be asking,
what a web services request looks like.
Well, our PC services are pretty simple.
It's any method, any parameter types,
any return type.
Something as simple as that.
We've got a Hello World service.
It's one class, say hello,
you'll notice it's not a subclass of
anything in the WebObjects universe.
It doesn't have to be.
It can be a subclass of, well,
object in this case.
It has one method, say hello,
that returns a simple string.
Again, you don't have to return
any special type of object.
Document-style services
are a little bit trickier.
You have to do a lot more processing,
and they have very specific interfaces.
Document services, again,
they can extend any class
in the Java universe.
But the methods that serve document
services have very specific prototypes.
They have to take one or more
WC3 DOM elements, and they have to return
a WC3 DOM element.
These elements are simply
converted using the standard
DOM mechanism into XML strings
and stuffed into the response.
Access doesn't try and figure
out what you want to be doing,
doesn't try and read your mind.
It just says,
"We trust you know what you're doing.
We're sending this out." This implies
that the request and response
is better be well formatted.
Now you want to deploy these services.
There's a couple ways to do this.
Access provides a WSDD file,
which is a web service
deployment descriptor.
It's fairly complicated,
as all such things should be.
Or we decided that we'd make it a little
bit simpler and do dynamic deployment.
In your application constructor,
you can simply call the
WoWebServiceRegistrar,
register web services for class,
and enter the class--passes
a parameter of the class name
whose methods you want to expose.
This particular method will expose all
of the methods on the SayHello class.
We actually provide methods that allow
you to restrict which methods on your web
service class are going to be exposed to.
The Web Services World.
And on the note of dynamic deployment,
we're going to pass this
presentation off to Ron Luu-Saang,
who's going to tell you all
about direct-to-web services.
Ron, around somewhere?
Thank you.
Thanks, Melissa.
Hello, everyone.
I am Ron Luu-Saang.
I am an engineer with the
Direct2Web and Direct2Java client
team in WebObjects Engineering.
So, on the note of Direct2Web services,
we're going to go over...
Going to go over three things today.
First, why we developed direct-to-web
services in the first place.
And then I'll talk a little bit
about what direct-to-web services is.
And then I'll go into how
direct-to-web services works and
try to explain how you can use it.
So first, why did we develop
direct-to-web services?
Well, a bunch of WebObjects engineers
were sitting around one day,
as we pretty much always do,
and somebody brought up web services.
And sure, it's a lot of hype,
there's so much hype behind it,
but we all agreed that web services is
going to be a really big technology,
so we should be there when it is big.
So some of us actually even agreed that
web services might be a cool technology,
and none of us thought that building a
web services application would be easy.
So we thought about it and thought, well,
if web services are cool,
and everyone knows EOF is cool, right,
well, we could put the two together and
develop something even cooler.
And being able to do that, though,
making it a really compelling solution
would mean that we'd have to make
it easy for our developers to use.
And part of our idea of how to make
things easy for our developers is that
our developers should write less code.
And this is the same philosophy
that's gone into a lot of
innovative products in WebObjects.
This is the same philosophy
we applied to HTML web page,
HTML-type web applications
using direct-to-web,
where you can get up and running
with a web application really
quickly with very little code.
And the same thing with Java Client,
where we brought direct-to-Java
Client to the three-tier distributed
Java Client application space.
In the next version of WebObjects,
we're going to do the same
thing with WebObjects.
We're going to do the same
thing with WebServices,
where we add direct-to-web
services on top of the general web
services support in WebObjects,
making it really easy for developers
to publish web services using
EOF without writing much code.
And in being able to do this,
we wanted developers to make
useful business-type web services.
And most of the really useful
web services out there today,
the 80% that we're trying to target,
80 to 90% we're trying to target,
do things like searching
of random data sources,
like the Google example,
or Barnes & Noble's web services.
Then of course there
are also purchase order,
invoice management-type web services,
and general information update and
information synchronization web services.
Being able to do all these things
very easily would be an important
point for direct web services.
And it happens that all of these
operations map really well to
things that we can do in EOF.
And another point to
trying to make this easy.
We wanted to make the--taking a look at
the current equation for web services,
it's pretty much do a lot of work and
then get a little bit of functionality
out of it for your web service.
With direct-to-web services,
we wanted to rearrange the equation a
bit so that for a little bit of work,
the minimum amount of work
required to get an app running,
you'd get a lot of functionality out of
your business logic as a web service.
The two use cases that we saw
as the common cases here were
where you wanted to publish
existing data as a web service,
or you have a new WebObjects
application or an existing WebObjects
application that you want to
add web services functionality to.
And it should just be four steps.
Pretty much for an existing data source,
you reverse engineer it with EOModeler,
our fantastic ER relationship
diagramming tool.
And add that model and any business logic
you build around it to your application.
Add a few frameworks that enable
the direct web services technology.
And start your application
and then configure it using
our Web Services Assistant.
It should be that easy.
And even easier is if you've already
built a WebObjects application
and you just want to add some
web services functionality to it.
We just leveraged the existing business
logic and model in your application.
You add a few frameworks again,
start your application,
and then configure it.
So that's why we developed
Direct-to-Web Services.
We wanted to give developers
the opportunity to build really
meaningful web services very
quickly without doing too much work.
So then what is direct-to-web services?
In truth, it's just a set of frameworks.
It's a technology based on a set
of frameworks and an assistant.
The frameworks that we require
for direct-to-web services
are the Java Access Framework,
which is just a wrapper around
the Apache Access Jar that
Melissa told you about earlier.
Then we have the
Java Web Services Generation Framework,
which not only has a lot of syllables,
but is also where all of the
magic for generating dynamic
web services comes from.
And then the two other frameworks there,
Java Direct-to-Web and
Java DTW Generation frameworks,
hold the rule system that allows
the web services generation
piece to be fully dynamic.
So those are the frameworks
of direct-to-web services,
but we also offer an assistant,
a swing-based application that you
can use to configure and manage
your direct-to-web services.
And very important when you're
building these applications,
you can also test right
in this assistant,
making it very easy for
you to get work done.
So in addition to offering the assistant,
we also offer a lot of default
functionality that you can customize.
This is how we get you up and running
really quickly with a web service.
We offer a default web service,
which is named a Wode
default web service,
and we also offer operations
for each entity that you
specify as a public entity.
When you say that an entity should
be allowed to be vended as a web
service out to the big world,
we create an operation,
four operations actually,
for each of those entities.
Insert, delete, search,
and update the basic operations that
you would want to do on any entity.
Don't worry,
they're not all enabled by default.
You won't be able to just delete
somebody else's entire database
from a random web service.
And because you can configure
everything very dynamically,
we also offer generating WSDL for you,
so you don't have to go through and
muck with the WSDL for your service.
We generate that dynamically.
So with that,
to show you kind of how this works,
to give you a quick demo,
I'd like to ask my lovely
assistant Francois up on stage.
He'll give you a quick demo
of Direct Web Services.
So time changes.
Two years ago,
he was my lovely assistant.
Still am, Francois.
So he's grown wings on implemented
crazy things that I get to demo.
I think most of you have already
seen the demo I did at the
Developer Tools Conference presentation
earlier this week.
Anyone hasn't seen it?
Okay, a few people,
so it's worth going back.
I'd like demo three, please.
Three.
No, not yet.
Three?
Trois?
No, it's three.
It's really three.
Okay, it's nine.
Okay, so we've got a model.
It's a model everyone has seen this week.
It is...
Are you still thinking about
the hidden in the framework
because there is a little bit of
business logic associated with it?
The Web is a real estate model.
Think about this as your
private information that you
don't want to show anyone.
It reflects the database.
You've got a lot of strings in there.
Names for entities, names for attributes.
You want to build an
interface on top of this.
Your web service will be the public
interface on top of your model.
What the web service
assistant will do is,
around this house with tinted windows,
is going to clear up a few windows
and make a few things seeable,
and paint some windows pink also,
so that it looks rosy inside there.
So I will create a new
project from this model.
[Transcript missing]
It's the usual WebObjects
application wizard.
Here's the JDBC adapter selected for us.
It's fine.
You can see in this list of frameworks
that you've got the AXIS framework
that Melissa was talking about earlier,
or Ron, I think,
and the direct web generation
The reason we could come up
with this technology so fast is
because even though it's in alpha,
the underneath has already seen
years of exposure in the form of
direct-to-web and direct-to-Java client.
And I will add my real estate framework.
I know Ron has prepared me one.
Where do you put it, Ron?
"Favorite?" "Go to the
build favorite." "Oh,
build, okay.
This one?" "Yeah."
Okay, so if I click next,
this product builder assistant is
clever enough to find the model
that is hidden in this framework.
And it will,
I can now build and launch the project.
It's going to take a little while.
Oh Ron, I've got something for you.
I brought a whistle in
case I make any mistake.
Ron Lue- Perfect.
Preemptive.
I don't know if I should blow
this into the microphone.
Okay, in the meantime, the app is ready.
So here is the assistant.
And the assistant is connecting
remotely to the web services
server that is now running.
And as Ron said,
it comes up with a default
service called WoDefaultService.
This tree view on the left-hand
side is a list of your services,
and each service contains an operation.
I can click on "New Operation"
and now I have an operation
in my default service.
The more important thing to do
is to decide which entities in
my model I want to make public.
As usual, I'm going to make the
listing entity public.
It's the most interesting
one in the model.
Because it's in alpha, I've got to save,
close, and reopen.
That won't happen in
the shipping product.
And you see the default services
that were created for me.
Search, insert, listing, update listing,
and delete listing.
This is all nice,
but most likely not what
you actually want to do.
So I can use that as a starting point
and clone the search listing operation.
Call it listings with bedrooms.
So, you see that on my operation
panel I've got four tabs.
One is for specifying the
arguments this operation,
this function is going to take.
One for specifying the
values that will be returned.
One for specifying formatters
associated with the arguments.
and one for specifying in which services
this operation should be executed.
You may want to have an admin service
that contains all operations available,
and then a user service that has
a subset of these operations.
And you can change an operation
globally across services.
Okay, so I'm going to edit my listing
with bedrooms and do a search
as the title says on bedrooms.
I will switch the operator
to show you that it works.
And return everything.
That will be a good starting point.
We've got a test interface up here,
which is taking a while to come up.
Here it is.
It has a tab to show you
a real-world WSDL file.
You see that you do not want
to have to write this by hand.
It's crazy.
I don't understand it.
A few people in your team do.
Had to learn it, I'd say, reluctantly.
I know we figured out to build
it automatically for you,
so hopefully you will
not have to edit them.
If I do a search on two bedrooms,
I get back a set of enterprise objects,
actually an array of them, three, four,
five, six, seven,
So this is not a fancy demo.
You're not going to see a client.
There are other sessions
that will show you clients.
I just want to show you the functionality
on how you can build services.
You can actually do pretty fancy
things already with this alpha version.
For example,
let's say I want to search to calculate
some... I'm an agent and I want to see
how much commission I can get if I sell
all the houses I'm listing right now.
So I'm going to call
it total... total what?
Total... Total earnings.
Total sales, because
Okay, it's still based on the listing.
And I actually cloned
the listing for bedrooms,
so I don't need the bedrooms.
Here I'm going to use a plus operator.
Ultimately, when all is done and said,
and written, all the code is written,
we will have a preview here where
you can drill down relationships
and access the attributes below.
For the moment,
you have to enter the keypath.
If you remember James Dempsey's song,
these are the keypaths
he was talking about.
I can type here agent.lastname.
That's a key path.
I will search on the
last name of the agent.
And for return value,
I don't want any of these.
I actually want another key path.
So it's going to return me listings.
I know each listing has an asking price.
We've got this operator functionality
on EOF where you can ask a few
operations and it's actually extensible.
You can add more operations
in your business logic.
For example, @sum is an operation,
@average is another one.
So here I'm going to sum the
asking price of the listing return.
And I'm going to change its name.
As usual, it's a good idea to rename your
public names so that you don't expose
the names you don't want to expose.
Your ugly gook.
Test.
So it's creating the WSDL and creating
a small client interface here.
I will search for,
I think Tony is in there,
so T-Star will get me
Tony Listings.
And here it is, the sum of the...
The total of what Tony could make
in sales would be almost $3 million.
I think he should
Okay,
so that will be it for this first demo,
and I'll let Ron get the stage again.
Thanks Francois.
I didn't even get to use the whistle.
Curses.
Okay.
So, you can see that this whole
thing of rules-based programming,
you can see why it's such a good idea.
We can get going with a real
working application very quickly
without writing any nasty code.
It really jump starts your development,
your application development cycle.
And the coolest thing, of course,
similar with direct-to-web
and direct-to-Java client,
your services here are synced
with your business logic.
So then that's what
direct-to-web services is.
But how does it work?
How does it do all of its magic?
The magic is in the rule system.
It's the same thing that you've
heard of from direct-to-web
and direct-to-Java client.
It's really just an inference engine
with a question-answer mechanism to it.
All of the inferences are done based
on rules that are held in rule files.
In general,
you would ask the rule system a question,
like, is the audience sleepy?
Once you ask it that question,
it looks through its rules and sees, oh,
I can figure out the answer
based on the time of day,
so that if the time of
day is in the afternoon,
then yes, the audience is indeed sleepy.
And it's this kind of question-answer
thing that happens all the time.
You ask it questions,
it gives you answers.
And the cool thing is that the rule
system can actually ask itself questions.
So that in order to figure
out what time of day it is,
It can go ask itself, "Hmm,
time of day." And one of the ways
to get answers back from the rule
system is through assignment classes.
It's a special class,
it's a direct-to-web class
called an assignment.
And you can actually put your own code
there to put some funny logic for how to
answer questions like the time of day.
Like this,
which I'm not sure actually works.
But you get the idea.
So all the heuristics for direct
web services live in these rules,
in a set of predefined rules
that come in the frameworks,
and also in some rules files that
are generated for you in your
application by the web services
assistant that Francois showed you.
And so all this happens,
all this magic happens,
and you have code-free services,
services where you've got actual
usable web services without
having to write any code.
Messages are just passed through
Axis and given to the rule system,
and everything is handled there for you.
And as far as how everything
works with a web service request,
this is similar to the diagram
that Melissa showed you earlier,
where a request comes in
and the Web Service Request
Handler hands it off to Access.
Access looks through its
registry and figures out,
"Oh, this is actually a
direct-to-web service call.
I'll hand it off to our framework
that does all the magic for
direct-to-web services."
And here we pull in a lot of
information from your EO model,
your business logic, and the rules files
that I told you about.
And we figure out what to do,
whether to do an insert, a search,
a delete, update,
and on what attributes to do searches
and perform all of these operations on.
And we return an array of results.
For instance, in a search,
returning an array of listings.
Once we give that back to Axis,
Axis then tries to serialize it
and runs into a few of the EOs,
for example.
So the EO Enterprise objects get passed
to an EO Enterprise object serializer,
which knows how to
serialize out objects fine,
but gets hints about how to serialize the
object by asking a serialization strategy
for what attributes to serialize.
And similar to
Java Web Services Generation,
it knows what to do based
on your rules file and your
EO model and business logic.
So the serialization strategy
can tell the object serializer,
the EO object serializer,
to only serialize out the price
and the agent name for a listing.
This way you only expose the
attributes of your EO that you want to.
And then the serializer
returns the serialized result,
the serialized object, back to Axis,
which hands it back to the
WoW web service request handler
and returns it to the client.
And as far as customizing
this whole process,
you saw that using rule models,
rule files, and your EO model is the
simplest way to customize this,
the whole process.
And this is similar to what we've
done before in Direct-to-Web
and Direct-to-Java Client,
where you start off with the
assistant to get all of the easy
customizations done really quickly.
And then if you want to do
some tricky customization,
you can go into the rules files
themselves using Rule Editor and make
custom rules or custom assignments.
And then if you run into a problem
where you still want to use
direct-to-web services and WebObjects,
and you know there's just one
little thing that you need to add,
and the rule system can't take you there,
you can freeze code.
With code generation,
you have to make sure that
it's what you want to do,
because it's kind of a pain to go
back once you've frozen the code.
Now, freezing operations starts off
with the idea that operations are
frozen across entire services.
They live in one application server
instance and are shared across services.
So once you've frozen an operation,
it's frozen for all services.
The WSDL for the operation
is frozen as well.
So you can get whatever chunks
of the WSDL for that operation
you need and plug it into,
for instance,
the dynamic WSDL that's used with
direct-to-web services or in a
separate service entirely that doesn't
require direct-to-web services.
The cool thing is,
once you've frozen the operation,
you can still manage the operation
using Direct Web Services Assistant.
You can't change any of the
argument types and result
types or anything like that.
Those are frozen in the code
that we generate for you.
But you can still at least test and
manage the operation with the Assistant.
And the coolest part is probably
that you can actually rip out the
code that we generate for you and
have it do useful work in another
WebObjects application that doesn't
require direct web services at all.
And to show you a little
bit of this magic,
I'll ask dear Francois back up on stage.
Okay, I'm back.
One thing I forgot to show you
earlier is this nice little tool that
comes... I think it comes with Axis,
right, Carl?
It enables you to monitor what's
happening on certain ports and
to prove you that we are really
carrying SOAP data around.
Here is a request a client did.
And you can see the SOAP envelope
body saying agent.lastname,
and the name of the function
call being total sales.
And here is a response that we returned.
Here, total sales response.
And it's fairly big
because we are still... Oh,
here is a summer.
[Transcript missing]
So I am going to attempt
to freeze a service.
Yes?
Should I do it with a complicated one?
Okay, let's freeze it.
I'll call it Total Sales.
Ooh, I want to open the right buckets
in Project Builder to show
you the magic happening there.
At the same time, I click Freeze.
The Java file was created for me.
And I will make it bigger.
You have to do it in the preferences.
Oh, in the preferences?
Sorry.
I'm not blind yet.
I usually don't do that on my...
[Transcript missing]
You see that it has a lot
of static arrays passing the
arguments that are now frozen,
agent.lastname,
passing the types of these arguments,
the operator that we are applying to it.
Here you see the entity we
are doing the operation on,
and building a simple fetch spec,
invoking a search on the editing
context and returning the result.
We also
We supply a few convenience
methods in a utility class that
is generated at the same time.
This class is common for all operations.
Once it's there, it's not created again.
And we build the portion of
the WSDL that corresponds to
the operation that was frozen.
You can now take this piece of WSDL,
add it to your handmade
WSDL if you want to.
[Transcript missing]
Let's say you want to do
transaction-based services and
you're going to want to do several
operations in a row before actually
committing to the database.
Your assistance lets you create
I believe a set of begin transaction--
maybe you can come help me-- a begin
transaction call and end transaction
call that lets you open a session.
Once it creates a session,
it will embed the session ID in
the response of your first service.
On the client side,
you'll be responsible to embed the
session ID back in your next request.
And as this goes on,
when you reach the end-- when you
do the last end transaction call,
the session-- the editing context in the
session will be retrieved and everything
will be saved in the databases.
The editing context and the
database will be synchronized.
That's done in the SOAP headers.
In the SOAP headers.
Should we just save that to Q&A,
actually?
Yes, because people will be able
to hear your question better.
Okay, so save all.
Oops, one thing I wanted to do
is to add possibly a log.
So I'm rebuilding and I added
a log to make sure that it's
actually my frozen component that
is invoked and not the dynamic one.
My frozen service that is
invoked and not the dynamic one.
If I now look at total sales,
it is disabled, but I can still test it.
Okay, now I will look for Andres.
And you see here that the
actual frozen service was
invoked and not the dynamic one.
And some results were returned.
Question, is it Melissa?
You want to conclude on the clients?
I've got a few more things to say.
We're almost done.
In addition to all this neat and nifty
stuff we've got on the server side,
we also provide a little
bit of client-side stuff.
Mostly we use Access.
They have a fairly good dynamic client.
We provide a bit of a wrapper to make
it a little bit cleaner and to make
it a little bit more intuitive to
do introspections so that you don't
have to dig through the WSDL the way
somebody using an Access client would.
We provide serializers,
as I mentioned earlier,
and deserializers for the
most used WebObjects classes.
The client that we provide has built-in
session handling so that if you're
using it with a WebObjects server,
it manages your sessions for
you as long as you're using the
same instance of the client.
And it uses HTTPS on the client
side if you want to use a secure
connection to a WebObjects application.
Which brings us to web
services and security.
Currently, the state of the art for web
service security is to use HTTPS.
This is a really undefined area.
Some of you may notice,
know that last month Microsoft and
IBM got together and came up with
the WS Security specification.
We'll probably try and do
something along that front,
provide some kind of support for it.
Don't quote me on that because, like,
well, this is forward-looking and we may
run into problems when they change
the spec in another month and a half.
We'll also track some of the emerging
standards that are going to be built
on top of WS Security and see if we can
do something along those lines for you.
But right now, like I said,
state of the art is HTTPS.
There's no authentication, really.
It's just nobody can snoop.
So in summary,
you can create web services and
WebObjects by leveraging your
existing WebObjects applications.
You can consume web services
using our client-side frameworks.
And direct web services rocks.
There's some resources that
you'll probably get these
slides off the web next week.
Here's some resources that you
might find useful if you're
interested in web services.
There's Apache.org, WC3.org,
where you can find WSDL and SOAP specs,
UDDI.org,
where you can find more than you've
ever wanted to know about UDDI,
Webservices.org,
which is a Microsoft-sponsored
website that contains a lot of
information about what is new and
interesting in the web services world,
and xmethods.org,
which is a place you can go to
find information about a lot of
the web services that are currently
sort of being served on the web.
You've all heard about
our lab at this point,
I'm assuming.
We have one downstairs.
Here's the hours.
Roadmap.
Some of the other sessions you
might be interested in if you're
interested in web services,
there... I guess one was yesterday,
so you'll have to get the DVD for
Client Web Services Frameworks.
There was a Java Web Services one this
morning that's not in the roadmap.
If you're interested in
doing server-side stuff,
you're probably
interested in performance,
so there's Session 407 Java Performance,
which is running in Hall C on Friday.
And for those of you who are
interested in rules-based programming,
here next is going to be a
direct-to-Java client presentation,
and of course there's the
feedback forum on Friday.
The Who to Contact, Tony, Bob,
our consulting arm,
which is named Dilbert for reasons
I really don't want to speculate on.
and places to get more information.
The developer documentation is online.
You can access our professional
tech support online.
There's a list of other places.
You can subscribe to WebObjects announce.
We have some documentation forthcoming,
a book on developing web services
and data serialization using XML that
should help those of you who need
to build stuff in this space.
There's a lot of these buffer slides
on the end of this presentation.
How to get the documentation?
It's in PDF and HTML forms on the web.
You can get print-on-demand.
Some of it comes with a product CD.
Some of it's in the box.
And you can check the
ADC News for the latest updates.
And now we'll do Q&A.